Okay,
my name is Denny Tudus and today is April the 5th,
1986. And I'm going to interview my uncle, Raleigh
Brotherman III. And
we're just going to go over Vietnam, when he was
there, what he did, and just a basic interview.
This is prepared for Terry Anderson. History 489,
Texas A&M University. Okay, my first question is
when did you go to Vietnam? In September of 68.
September of 68, which would be right around the
Tet Offensive. And were you drafted or did you
enlist? No, I enlisted in the Air Force in 66. Okay,
and when you went to Vietnam, what was your rank?
Sergeant. Sergeant, okay. Okay, once you arrived
in Vietnam, what was your job? I was in what they
call the military airlift command and it was air
passenger service. It was my career field and
I was stationed at Cam Ranh Bay primarily. Our main
function was to get troops in and out of the country
And then once they were in the country, to move them
around the smaller aircraft. And our job was to set
up the different airfields
and keep them secured for in-country travel.
And also manage the in and out ports like Cameron
Bay and Saigon and Da Nang. Is this I Corps 3? No, I
was in 2 Corps. I spent most of my time in 2 Corps.
Cameron was my home base, but we went out to little
places like Nha Trang and
Pleiku. Pleiku was around here.
A little bitty handlets in the area for the smaller
aircraft like the C-123 and C-130s. And the
lock is not too far from there. I can't even think of
it. That's sort of a rough draft of a map. But the
whole idea was for us to keep track of who was where.
It was air transportation for all the services at
that time and civilians.
Were y'all ever in combat? We were
non-combatants, but we were armed when we were
away from Cameron. Cameron was such a big, secure
base In the Air Force wisdom, they felt like we
shouldn't be armed. We'd probably kill each
other. Watch the airmen run around with rifles.
When we left the base to go into the field, we were
always armed. Any combat we were in was primarily
just defensive because whenever it was dark,
Charlie would come out. It was harassment fire
from rocket attacks and stuff like that. And a
couple of times they got into Cameron or rocketed
Cameron and just tear up our runway a little bit and
go away. But it was a few anxious moments. But we
weren't out physically looking for Charlie. He
was always trying to mess up our little party. So
you were pretty lucky as far as that's concerned.
You're fortunate enough not to be there.
Do you think that we belonged there at the time?
Yeah, we pretty much committed ourselves to the
domino theory that if Vietnam fell then
Cambodia and Laos and everybody else would go with
it, would fall into communism. So we felt like we
needed to be there to stem the red tide. But did you
think that we should have declared war? Because
there's always the gripes of limited power of
Congress. It was always considered a police
action.
But when you're over there, you don't think in
terms of police action. You always think you are at
war. It was always a war to us. And we were just under
the assumption that we were there to win the war.
And all these artificial constraints that were
put on us. Do you consider yourself as a hawk or a
dove? Well at the time by definition I would have
been a hawk because I
wanted to be there and I didn't see any benefit to
the peace movement Because in my estimation, it
was not a peace movement, it was just a good excuse
to smoke dope. Yeah. Lots of that. That's what I was
going to ask you about, you know, drugs over there
played an important role towards the later years.
Probably because it probably cost us the war,
among other things, that the... Fragging. That
dope was just all over the place. Uh-huh. And it was
my theory that that the Red Chinese, at least, were
smart enough to keep that dope coming. And that was
because that was their best weapon, to keep the
American guys high and disoriented to the point
where they could just walk right over it. Yeah,
they didn't care. That's interesting. I think
that a lot of the officers that were sent there were
so gung-ho, and we've read several accounts, And
in the readings that we've had, that some of these
green officers went and the tour of duty was only,
you know, what, 12 months, 18 months? 12 months.
And 12 months isn't enough time. You know, once
you've gone through nine months, you just have
three months left to serve and you're not going to
risk your life for anybody or anyone. But when the
green lieutenants and what have you would arrive,
they'd be so gun-ho. And their troops wouldn't,
you know, they'd be short timers. Towards the end
of the war, a lot of fragging occurred where people
that may have been on drugs were killing their
officers just for the sake of saving their own
lives, I guess. It's pretty, I don't know. Yeah,
it's pretty bizarre in the field where, because
we've, and pulling these guys out on the field,
they were almost hardly recognizable as human
beings. Of course, by contrast, we were a little, I
guess, since we had it, much better.
We were at least modestly clean, and these guys
were coming up with this absolutely And you could
tell that they lost their, a lot of their human
instincts or just the human social ability
because they were just, they had experienced so
much and had just been in, for months of just being
in the filth and... Plus their resources. And
whatever they've seen, they've just gone to, what
I'm trying to get at is that they had gotten their
more baser instincts, more animalistic, And it
wouldn't surprise me if a lot of guys got wiped out
because somebody looked off to somebody and it was
just convenient, the person was conveniently
disposed of. And I'm sure once they got back to the
States that they got, a lot of them turned away from
that because they were away from that hostile
environment, or the primitive environment.
Plus, they're so young. The average age was 19. We
had warrant officers. The Army promoted their
guys
so fast that they had captains that were
helicopter or gunship pilots in the Army that had
to be in their early 20s, early, early 20s. And they
just, they were barely, you know, old enough to be
flying an aircraft. Must have been held up from
enlistee or craftee to captain. Not even old
enough to shave in a lot of cases.
How do you think LBJ, whose administration was in
charge while you were there, how do you think he
handled the war? I kind of think LBJ would have
wanted us to win this thing. I've never had real
high esteem for LBJ, but he may have been too much of
a diplomat.
You think he was involved too deeply? You think he
should have let Westmoreland run the show more so
than he did? Well, his administration, his House
and Senate ran the war. Westmoreland, I don't
think, had that much to say about it. Either
Johnson, not Johnson personally, but the
government, the U.S. Congress held us back way too
much. Kept their heel on us and would not let the Air
Force and Marines do their job. And there have been
a lot fewer deaths. And a lot fewer men of our guys in
the field if we could have had more of an air war and
more
of a... We could have bombed the place to oblivion
if we really wanted to win the war in just a matter of
minutes. But all that we ended up doing is just
sending young guys out there to die in sort of a war
of attrition. Do you think we should have bombed
the cities? instead of staying into bombing the Ho
Chi Minh Trail and the borders? I don't know that we
should have gone in and deliberately looked to
wipe out entire cities. Civilians, whatever.
Because our whole idea was to
do more than stem their supply lines. And we
need to do it. attack that angle of it, the supply
lines, to the Ho Chi Minh Trail. But also, we never
seemed to really get interested in the tunnel
network that was all under Vietnam that we now find
out was just very pervading that we went
everywhere in Vietnam. It was like fighting a
bunch of ants, if that's what they were referred
to. These people were so...
These people have been at war for so long that they
know the tricks and they kind of revert, like I said
before, back to their, to an animalistic state
because they can survive for months underground
and got up in trees and wherever else if you want.
You wouldn't even be looking for a human being. And
they, we were fighting on their turf right in their
backyard. They knew where everything was. And
until we got into a real, take-no-prisoners,
kick-ass-and-take-names attitude, we weren't
about to win that war. The take-no-prisoners
reminds me of body counts. You would tend to agree,
I imagine, that the body counts were false. always
incorrect well that's all come out now it's uh
everything was so much was
i i'm busy
so much of so much emphasis was put on body count and
uh where i was on the beach and stuff whenever we'd
uh Whenever we would be invaded,
it was just to see all the bodies piled up and
burning or whatever it is. Then somebody over
there trying to get a good accurate estimate of how
many bodies were taken as compared to how many of
our lives were lost. Usually in our area, we were so
well We didn't lose anybody.
You're lucky to be protected, that's for sure.
Okay, were you aware of any of the pacification
programs? The pacification programs pretty much
ran up through 68 through 69, and after Tet, they
pretty much fell to pieces. And by pacification, I
mean the strategic hamlets and all of these
different programs that were set up to win the
hearts and minds of the Vietnamese. Or wham,
whammam, as it's referred to in lots of books. I
guess I'm totally ignorant of that program. OK. I
had no idea it was going on as such. You know, the
strategic hamlets, they were building. hamlets
for the Vietnamese to live in. They had to live
there at night. They were totally removed from
their ancestral lands, put in little
encampments, which we'd call basically a
reservation, kind of if you look back to how the
Indians were treated. They were corralled,
placed in these hamlets, were guarded. And if they
were seen outside of the hamlet's perimeter at
night, they were shot. They were considered VC. I
don't see how you can win the hearts and minds of
someone when you're constraining them so much.
But you weren't aware of any of this? Well, if
that's what was the little village outside of Cam
Ranh was supposed to be, It was for obvious reasons
why somebody approached the village after
nightfall. It was assumed that they were hostile.
And that was pretty much the way everybody had to
be. Because
with the problem of cross-racial
identification, There's not going to be any
American soldier who's going to know which
Vietnamese is good or bad. So we had to take, like in
our encampment in Cam Ranh,
the Koreans were right next to us.
And they guarded, and we guarded the bay. And it was
just an
unwritten law that if the sampans came in at night
beyond a certain point, or in the daytime, it
doesn't matter, it was sort of like Gaddafi's line
of death. You came in too far, you were going to get
blown out of the water. And then you were a dead man.
And they knew that. They were out there fishing.
They were supposed to be out there fishing. They
were not to come to shore. Or on our turf, so to
speak. And they were just... Everybody knew that
they got... And they were just... Every day,
somebody would get blown out of the water. Because
they got too close. Because they got too close. And
that was... And everybody had to understand that
we were at war. And their own personal... little
inconveniences could not be taken into
consideration because we don't know who they are.
Do you think the media played an important role in
the war? Yes, they did. They created such a an
anti-war sentiment, and such an anti-G.I.
sentiment. And every night you could see what
happened during the day in Vietnam, or in David.
David Ford. David Ford. And created such a hostile
environment toward
our winning the war or our being there that we never
had a chance to build up a national spirit
well the national spirit was there at first it just
it uh dissipated after after tet when when we saw
that we weren't winning the war like everybody
assumed That's when the kids at home became more
aggressive? I don't know that we ever had. I can go
back to when I first started hearing about Vietnam
as a possible place for me to go. It was in high
school when I was 63 or so. People were already
going to Vietnam, Marines and stuff like that, and
people like that. Not knowing that we'd been there
since the 50s, or actually never. Yes, it's an
advisory capacity. And people are already
starting to go there and die. And there was never
the feeling that, like, I'm sure that soldiers or
young men got during the World War II era, where it
was really a good thing to go do this. That we were
fighting for a good cause. And
I attribute that to the way that the media handled
it and the peace movement
and just the liberal attitude that the media has
had at that point and continues to this day.
That we can't get into a conflict without first
checking with the media to make sure it's all right
with them. They want to be involved in everything
and they want to downplay the...
The military as well. They're just trying to make
us look like fools and like really bad guys because
we were just trying to practice basic survival.
And there was nothing that the GIs could get
excited about. It
was just that they were going to try to do anything
that good to stay alive. They were not fighting for
their country.
So the media showed the students at home that, hey,
this isn't where you want to be. You think that they
don't want to support that the people at home,
after seeing some of these clips and newsreels and
hearing Walter Cronkite and Morley Safer and Keys
Beach and all these other guys that were sending
back messages or clips of film, you think that
these little reels that were sent home made the
people here, students, young high school and
college age kids, feel that it wasn't something
that they would want to participate in? No. They
really, it was a very, very ugly war by the very
nature of guerrilla warfare. It's just absolute.
The atrocities and the things that we do to
kill and maim people. And then we've met enough
that it actually happens, but then to portray it on
the silver screen every night. It really, really,
really preys on people's minds and senses.
Okay. How did you feel when you got back home? Glad
to be home. Glad to be alive. I didn't feel so much
like that everybody hated me. like I hear today so
much that some people have a hard time getting over
the war. And I was just glad to be alive. I felt like I
had aged a hundred years. I'd seen more than I ever
needed to see. But everything was forgotten. It
was just like once
With the night I left in Cam Ranh, we were back in Cam
Ranh now, where it was relatively safe, but things
have deteriorated. The whole year I was there, we
had been in more and more attacks, and the base that
was supposed to be so strong was, we were getting
satchel charges on every other night, thrown into
everything, and everybody was just on pins and
needles as to what was gonna blow up next. And the
night I left, we were going, we were on red alert
again. And I was just thinking, oh God, here I am.
The last night here, we're all going to get blown
away. And just wait, just wait for the sun to come up
because that seemed to be after like four o'clock
in the morning. Everything settled down. It's
just like everybody said, well, enough for the
night, we're going home. But the time came for me to
finally I'd get on the aircraft, or Freedom Bird as
they call them. Did you go to Japan from there? No,
we went straight on back. I don't think we even
stopped. It was non-stop. And then once you were
back in the States, you just... Landed at Tacoma,
Washington.
And
got off the plane. And went over to see... my guys in
the military airline command section to see if
they could get me on a hop back to San Antonio. A hop
is a military plane. It's any kind of aircraft
to get back to San Antonio. But you were already out
of the military as of that point? Oh, no, no, no. I
still had, I had an Air Force have a four-year
enlistment. Okay. And I had about a year left And so
I was on my 30-day leave, and I was going to the
Laredo Air Force Base from there. But it was...
Were you glad that you went when you did? Oh sure, I
was glad to be. I volunteered to go to Vietnam, and I
was sent to Vietnam, probably. And
I figured that I would probably, I had just a good
chance of making it alive. It does not make it. And
it was a long 365 days or whatever it turned out to
be. But I got back and it just wasn't, it didn't prey
on my memory that much. Nightmares once in a while,
there's nothing excruciating it. But you feel
fortunate that you didn't have to get into the,
say, more of the jungle-type fighting? Oh, yeah,
sure. It could have been really... I think that's
the way it was just ordained for me, not to be in
the... Because I could have easily been, when I was
at the draft board, well, when you enlist,
everybody's in all one big room to swear in. The
draftees, the enlistees, everybody takes the
same oath. And they're all in Army, Navy, Marines.
And when it's time to split up, we all go our
separate ways. And I could have easily been in with
that group that were drafted into the Army. And
probably most of those guys are dead. Because
probably most of them went to... In 66, everybody
got called up. My 2S deferment for school was
worthless. Unless I was going to do something like
be a doctor or something like that. That would be
really, really important. So I probably would
have been drafted anyway. And it was better to
enlist than to be drafted? Yeah, I couldn't help
it. I didn't want to go in the Army. You could pick
your branch of service. And
an Air Force, I might learn something there.
It wouldn't be just cannon fodder. Well, have you
kept up with any of the current events? Do you think
that all the Vietnam veterans programs are really
going to help the vets, like the people that have
suffered from Agent Orange? Yeah, it seems like
you always hear that. I wondered if I could,
because they use that stuff all the time, this
pesticide, or antifoliant, and they sprayed the
hell out of us all the time. I wondered if I would...
But I wonder if we're not making too much of all
that. These
veterans programs, there's obviously a lot of
guys out there who feel like they've been
slighted.
But there are guys out there who are going to feel
like they're slighted anyway. So my way of
thinking is it's over and done with.
You've got to go on with your life. You can't just
keep living in the past all the time. If some of
these guys have real serious mental problems,
what's it called, delayed syndrome? Vietnam
syndrome. Some kind of post-trust.
Then they should deal with it. And not keep
dressing up like a... in their fatigues and having
parades because that's just there may be a few guys
in there who are really really sincere about this
and then the rest of them are just hangers on in
there to collect on what everybody is going to
collect on so you just assume put it aside and go
forward we end up in Nicaragua or Israel then hell
let's go let's not keep thinking we're going to to
hold up Vietnam and Korea and all these other
things as being a history repeating itself.
They're not the same. It's a different mindset.
Everything is different about it. We have more at
stake in Nicaragua. I mean, this is pretty close to
us. It's a whole lot closer than Vietnam. People
say that we shouldn't have lost Vietnam, but
Vietnam didn't mean as much to us, I guess, as
Nicaragua's going to mean. Fighting the Chinese
is one thing. We're not going to have, you know, we
couldn't afford to fight the Chinese at that time.
I don't believe. That's one thing about all these
Rambo movies and all these other, the hell of it is,
we still live, we still lose. No matter what you do,
and no matter what we say, what we could have done,
we still lost it. Yeah. And so we had to deal with
that and not lose another
one. But the next time we're involved in
something, if we do get involved in Nicaragua, you
don't think that for a minute that we're going to
fight it or make the same mistakes that we made in
Vietnam, do you? I think we better not. I think that
if we do, I'm moving to some other country. So it's
the... soldier in Vietnam had his tour, his
12-month tour, I think that'll change, don't you?
Because people in World War II were sent to fight
and win the war. Yeah, I just recently heard the
rhetoric about that. 12
months is a long time. But I guess the feeling is now
that In World War II, they kind of just stayed in the
war, like you said, until it was won. And all this
turnover may have had a deciding effect on the
outcome. I never really thought of it until just
recently. Well, you'd think if you had put in six
months or nine months of heavy fighting, and then
all of a sudden you realized you only had, you know,
three more months to go it uh... you'd lose your
zest for fighting you'd become more kicked back
yeah i guess that's i think korea started that when
they were on the point system with so many after you
accumulated so many points for for being there for
maybe some other meritorious actions you got to
leave early leave earlier
I think the attitude should be we stay there until
it's over. Well, is there anything else that you
could add? What was your rank when you got back? Had
you advanced at all? I was still a sergeant.
Because in the Air Force, they pretty well, I was a
sergeant E3. That was the enlisted rank number
three from the bottom. And you didn't come out of
the Air Force at that time with any higher rank
after four years in E4, or Staff Sergeant. That
just was sort of the unwritten law. Unless you did
something awfully, awfully, awfully
meritorious or wonderful, or they wanted you to
reenlist so bad that they would give you an extra
strike. So by the time I got back to the States, I
ended up a staff sergeant. But it didn't mean
anything because I was on my way out anyway. But
the rank in the Air Force wasn't as necessary or
wasn't as changing in the Army, in the Air Force as
it was in the Army, because the Army guys, they were
losing people, either to death or they're getting
out, because they only had a two-year enlistment.
So those guys during the wartime experience could
find themselves promoted way ahead of anybody,
because they just needed ranking people, like the
ones that they lost. Did you think that the black
market over there was a detriment to our country?
So I know you got a stereo. Didn't you get a stereo
over there? Oh, no, I bought that in Hong Kong. Oh,
did you really? Okay, I thought... That was all
legitimate. The only black market that we're
talking about is a... Jeez, you know, we're... If
somebody could do an exercise...
Sorry about the dog barking. We're just trying to
take care of that. But we're going to go ahead and
continue. If it ever is known about the civilians
and actually whoever else was involved and all the
goings on over there with the civilian
contractors and the military and all the goods and
services that were passed back and forth, You call
it corruption, you call it spoils of war, you call
it just trying to make things a little bit nicer for
you over there while you're over there. You trade
an air conditioner for a jeep or a jeep for a
surfboard or something. Whatever you can do to
make life a little more palatable. That's not
exactly black, black market. When I think of black
market, I think of all the... People that were
making money. Oh, yeah. That's a very
lucrative... War is always a lucrative
proposition for somebody. When I think of black
market, for instance, the dope that went... That
was one place... I only had maybe a few semesters of
college at that point, so I really wasn't into the
college scene yet, and the dope scene was getting
pretty well fired up on all the campuses at that
point. And if there's anything that kept me from
ever really getting, I guess, delivered from
being involved in the dope scene was seeing what
happens to people who Who were on it. Who were on it
and who were actually, they lost their lives
because of it. It really wiped out so many guys
because a lot of this marijuana and Cambodian red
and all that really high-powered stuff that was
over there. Some of it was laced with opium, which
would kill you. It would get you wasted. But, yeah,
there were some of the guys who were just so
blitzoid by the time they got back there, they
didn't know who they were. And I made a conscious
decision at that point, I would never get involved
in this stuff. How come the Army didn't do anything
about it? It seems like, you know, we've read
articles in our readings that say that everybody
was aware of it going on, but nothing was done about
it. And you could, if you brought it up, it was just,
you know, your... you were just put aside, or you
know, whatever comments you made were just, they
were, you know, they would acknowledge your, you
know, remarks or questions, but they'd never do
anything about it. To me. Well, of course, the way
anybody took it seriously, you know, they were
aware of it, because we'd wiped out, our forces had
wiped out VidCon soldiers who were just kind of
laying around doing the opium thing.
And they were so stoned that they didn't offer any
resistance. But that's also how they fought a lot
too. They were such militarily superior
fighters. But sometimes don't you think that they
were just so high that that made them much more of a
fighting machine? Could be. Because I know if I was
like that, you know, confronted with the... you
know, war, I think that I wouldn't want to feel any
pain. If I knew I had chances of dying, I wouldn't
want to feel any pain. Yeah, and there's no telling
how much of that stuff relates with some type of
poison to kill all of our troops. So that aspect of
the black market existed, and then whatever the
GIs could make out of selling from the Army Air
Force Exchange Service to the locals, making a few
bucks here and there.
So that's why some... Whatever, prostitution
went on, whatever. All that stuff had to also not
only be morally incorrect, let's say, But the
Vietnamese probably got to look at us and say, look
at these guys. They're just here to exploit our
country as much as they can. There's no
high-mindedness here. There's no great cause.
They're just here. And by that same token, the
Vietnamese, boy, once one of these rice farmers
has seen the bright lights of Saigon, he ain't
going back. He's got a few bucks in his pocket now
because he traded in a bunch of beer cans to
somebody so they could make grenades out of them.
It's just always a way to make a buck in Vietnam. So
the Vietnamese didn't hold a very high opinion of
Americans. We didn't have any high opinion of
them. We thought they were cowardly. You never
want to be caught in a firefight with the
Vietnamese as your backup because they were just
as cowardly as they could be. And we felt that all
they were out there for was to make a buck off the
GIs. Because they'd sell you anything and
everything. And there was no, we never got the
feeling that we were there to protect their
democracy because we're looking at people who had
no concept of democracy or they had no concept of
anything beyond basic survival.
Well, what else is there that you'd like to add? Do
you think that there's anything I've left out that
may be important? This is my first interview and
when it comes to war you can't really do
you think that students ought to be taught you know
a class about Vietnam or do you think this is a good
how do I say it you think it's worth students it's
unusual that somebody would make a course out of a
out of a conflict, but of course if we learned
something about it, because you never hear about
Korea.
If our situation were changed to a certain point,
and I was interviewing my uncle who was a veteran of
Korea,
that never happened. It was such a dull little But
we won that one, too. Well, nobody won that one. We
just sort of stood two of us up side and said, OK,
let's just quit. I guess. It wasn't really a
defeat, but then it wasn't any decisive victory,
because there's still a North Korea.
But that was also another one of those wars that was
a guerrilla warfare. And it was probably just as
nasty and just as hard fought and unlike the big
World War II. After coming off that resounding
victory in World War II,
this must have been a real letdown for a lot of the
guys that were involved in it. Of course, the
frosting on the cake would have been a bit loud. But
if there's anything to be learned about it,
there's just so much. We just had so many
presidents that all took a shot at trying to do
something. I found the class very interesting
because, like I say, when I was young, I saw it on TV.
And it's just something that I never grasped until
I finally started reading about it and realized
how badly we screwed up. and how it's affected the
lives of millions of Americans. And I'm sure
whenever veterans or anybody sit around over a
glass of beer and start a friendly conversation
about it, and you start talking about the
traditional war story and how you embellish it
over the years, it gets a little bit better and
better and better and better.
The frustrating part is that once you talk about
it, it just brings up old, old stuff, and you still
lost the war. Yeah. It doesn't matter. You can just
sit there and we can complain about Johnson and the
Congress and the corruption and this and that and
the other thing, but it doesn't change the
outcome. So it seems if there's any futility in
discussing it or having a course in it, it's just
that we... We need to learn not to make the mistake
again. Yeah, that's probably what we'll learn out
of it. Well, I guess that'll do it. I appreciate you
helping me out. My pleasure. And, gosh, I hope I
don't have to go do anything like that. Learn to
speak Spanish. Yeah. Thanks a lot. Okay. Bye.